I hate the fucking world, too much god damn fuckers in it. Too many thoughts and different societies all wrapped up together in this fucking place called AMERICA. Everyone has their own god damn opinions on every god damn thing and you may be saying “well what makes you so different?” because I have something only me and V1 have, SELF AWARENESS. Call it existentialism or whatever the fuck you want. We know what we are to this world and what everyone else is. We learn more than what caused the civil war and how to simplify quadratics in school. We have been watching you people. We know what you think and how you act. All talk and no actions. People who are said to be brave or courageous are usually just STUPID. Then they say later that they did it on purpose cause they are brave when they did [it] on fucking accident. GOD everything is so corrupt and so filled with opinions and points of view and people’s own little agendas and schedules. This isn’t a world anymore. It’s HOE2 and no one knows it. Self awareness is a wonderful thing. I know I will die soon, so will you and everyone else. Maybe we will be lucky and a comet will smash us back to day 1. people say it is immoral to follow others, they say be a leader. Well here is a fuckin news flash for you stupid shits, everyone is a follower! Everyone who says they aren’t followers and then dresses different or acts different . . . they got that from something they saw on TV or in film or in life. No originality. How many Jo MAMMA jokes3 are there and how many do you think are original and not copied. KEINE [German: none]. It’s a fucking filthy place we live in. All these standards and laws and great expectations [?] are making people into robots even though they might “think” they aren’t and try to deny it. No matter how hard I try to NOT copy someone I still AM! Except for this fucking piece of paper right here, and BTW [by the way] spelling is stupid unless I say, I say spell it how it sounds, it’s the fuckin easiest way! Hey try this sometime, when someone tells you something, ask “why?” eventually they will be stumped and can’t answer any more. That’s because they only know what they need to know in society and school. Not real life science. They will end up saying words = to this “because! Just shut up!” People that only know stupid facts that aren’t important should be shot, what fucking use are they. NATURAL SELECTION. Kill all retards, people with brain fuck ups, drug addicts, people who can’t f igure out how to use a fucking lighter. Geeeawd! People spend millions of dollars on sav ing the lives of retards, and why. I don’t buy that shit like “oh, he’s my son, though!” so the fuck what, he ain’t normal, kill him. Put him out of his misery. He is only a waste of time and money, then people say “but he is worth the time, he is human too.” No he isn’t, if he was then he would swallow a bullet cause he would realize what a fucking [illegible] he was.