p. 26,006 As I said before, self-awareness is a wonderful thing. I know what all you fuckers are think ing and what to do to piss you off and make you feel bad. I always try to be different, but I always end up copying someone else. I try to be a mixture of different things and styles, but when I step out of myself I end up looking like others or others THINK I am copying. One big fucking problem is people telling me what to fuckin do, think, say, act, and everything else. I’ll do what you say IF I feel like it. But people (ie, parents, cops, God, teachers) telling me what to [arrow to “do, think, say, act”] makes me not want to fucking do it! That’s why my fucking name is REB!!! No one is worthy of shit unless I say they are. I feel like God and I wish I was, having everyone being OFFICIALLY lower than me. I already know that I am higher than most anyone in the fucking welt [German: world] in terms of universal Intel ligence. And where we stand in the universe compared to the rest of the UNIVERSE. and if you think I don’t know what I’m talking about then you can just “BUCK DICH” [German: bend over]4 and saugen mein hund [German: suck my dog]! Isn’t America supposed to be the land of the free? How come, If I’m free, I can’t deprive a stupid fucking dumbshit from his possessions if he leaves them sitting in the front seat of his fucking van out in plain sight and in the middle of fucking nowhere on a Frifuckingday night.5 NATURAL SELECTION. Fucker should be shot. Same thing with all those rich snotty toadies at my school. Fuckers think they are higher than me and everyone else with all their $ just because they were born into it? Ich denk NEIN [German: I think not]. BTW [by the way], “sorry” is just a word. It doesn’t mean SHIT to me. Everyone should be put to a test, an ULTIMATE DOOM test, see who can survive in an environment using only ‘smarts’ and military skills. Put them in a Doom world, no authority, no refuge, no BS copout excuses. If you can’t figure out the area of a triangle or what “cation” means, you die! If you can’t take down a demon with a chainsaw or kill a hell prince with a shotgun, you die! Fucking snotty rich fuckheads [apparently a name] who rely on others or on sympathy or $ to get them through life should be put to this challenge. Plus it would get rid of all the fat, retarded, crippled, stupid, dumb, ignorant, worthless people of this world. No one is worthy of this planet, only me and who ever I choose, there is just no respect for anything higher than your fucking boss or parent. Everyone should be shot out into space and only those people I say should be left behind.