HATE! I’m full of hate and I love it. I HATE PEOPLE and they better fucking fear me if they know what’s good for ’em. Yes I hate and I guess I want others to know it, yes I’m a racist and I don’t mind. Niggs and spics bring it on to themselves, and another thing, I am very racist towards white trash P.O.S.’s [piece of shits] like and they deserve the hatred, otherwise I probably wouldn’t hate them. It’s a tragedy, the human nature of people will lead to their downfall. People’s human nature will get them killed. Whether by me or Vodka, it’s happened before, and not just school shootings like those pussy dumbasses over in Min nesota who squealed.16 Throughout history, its our fucking nature! I know how people are and why and I can’t stand it! I love the Nazis too . . . by the way, I fucking can’t get enough of the swastika, the SS, and the iron cross. Hitler and his head boys fucked up a few times and it cost them the war, but I love their beliefs and who they were, what they did, and what they wanted. I know that form of government couldn’t have lasted long once the human equation was brought in, but damn it, it sure looked good. Every form of government leads to downfalls, everything will always fuck up or yeah something. It’s all doomed, god damn it. This is beginning to make me get in a corner. I’m showing too much of myself, my views and thoughts, people might start to wonder, smart ones will get nosy and something might happen to fuck me over, I might need to put on one helluva mask here to fool you all some more. Fuck fuck fuck. It’ll be very fucking hard to hold out until April. If people would give me more compliments all of this might still be avoidable . . . but probably not. Whatever I do people make fun of me, and sometimes directly to my face. I’ll get revenge soon enough. Fuckers shouldn’t have ripped on me so much huh!17 Ha! Then again it’s human nature to do what you did . . . so I guess I am also attacking the human race. I can’t take it, it’s not right . . . true . . . correct . . . perfect. I fucking hate the human equation. Nazism would be fucking great if it weren’t for individualism and our natural instinct to ask questions. You know what maybe I just need to get laid. Maybe that’ll just change some shit around. That’s another thing, I am a fucking dog. I have fantasies of just taking someone and fucking them hard and strong. Someone like where I just pick her up, take her to my room, tear off her shirt and pants and just eat her out and fuck her hard. I love flesh . . . weisses fleisch! Dein weisses fleisch erregt mich so, Ich bin doch nur ein Gigolo! [German: Your white flesh excites me so, I am just a gigolo18]. I want to grab a few different girls in my gym class, take them into a room, pull their pants off and fuck them hard. I love flesh . . . the smooth legs, the large breasts, the innocent flawless body, the eyes, the hair, jet black, blond, white, brown, ahhh I just want to fuck! Call it teenager hormones or call it a crazy fuckin racist rapist. Es ist mir egal [German: it’s all the same to me]. p. 26,016 I just want to be surrounded by the flesh of a woman, someone like who I wanted to just fuck like hell, she made me practically drool, when she wore those shorts to work . . . instant hard on . . . I couldn’t stop staring. And others like [several names] in my gym class, or whatever in my gym class, and others who I just want to overpower and engulf myself in them. Mmm. I can taste the sweet flesh now . . . the salty sweet, the animalistic movement . . . iccchhh . . . lieeebe . . . . . . . fleisccchhhh [German: I love flesh]. “Weisses fleisch” — perfect song for me. Who can I trick into my room first? I can sweep someone off their feet, tell them what they want to hear, be all nice and sweet, and then “fuck ’em like an animal, feel them from the inside” as Reznor19 said. Oh — that’s something else . . . that one NIN [Nine Inch Nails] video I saw, “Broken” or “Closer”20 or something. The one where the guy is kidnapped and tortured like hell . . . actual hell. I want to do that too. I want to tear a throat out with my own teeth like a pop can. I want to gut someone with my hand, to tear a head off and rip out the heart and lungs from the neck, to stab someone in the gut, shove it up to their heart, and yank the fucking blade out of their rib cage! I want to grab some weak little freshman and just tear them apart like a wolf, show them who is god. Strangle them, squish their head, bite their temples in the skull, rip off their jaw, rip off their collar bones, break their arms in half and twist them around, the lovely sounds of bones cracking and flesh ripping, ahhh . . . so much to do and so little chances.