As part of the human race, and having the great pleasure of being blessed with a brain, I can think. Humans can do whatever they want. There is no laws of nature that prevent humans from making choices. Maybe from actually DOING some of those choices, but not from making the choice. If a man chooses to speed while driving home one day then it is his fault for whatever happens. If he crashes into a school bus full of kiddies and they all burn to death, it’s his fault. It’s only a tragedy if you think it is, and then it’s only a tragedy in your own mind so you shouldn’t expect others to think that way also. It could also be a miracle for another person maybe that bus stopped the car from plowing into a little old lady walking on the sidewalk, one could think it was a “miracle” that she wasn’t hit. You see, anything and everything that happens in our world is just that, a HAPPENING. Anything else is relative to the observer, but yet we try to have a “universal law” or “code” of what is good and bad and that just isn’t fuckin correct. We shouldn’t be allowed to do that. We aren’t GODS, just because we are at the top of the food chain with our technology doesn’t mean we can be “judges” p. 26,012 of nature. Sure we can think what we want, but you can “think” and “behave” you can judge people and nature all you want, but you are still wrong! Why should your morals apply to everyone else. “Morals” is just another word, and that’s it. I think we are all a waste of natural resources and should be killed off, and since humans have the ability to choose . . . and I’m human . . . I think I will choose to kill and damage as much as nature allows me to so take that, fuck you, and eat napalm + lead! HA! Only nature can stop me. I know I could get shot by a cop after only killing a single person, but hey guess the fuck WHAT! I chose to kill that one person so get over it! It’s MY fault! Not my parents, not my brothers, not my friends, not my favorite bands, not computer games, not the media. IT is MINE! Go shut the fuck up!